Last thing I want to talk about
is removing missing values or
NA values from an object.
This is a very common operation in, in,
in data analysis because most realistic
data have lots of missing values.
And so the way you can do this for,
of either a vector, or
a matrix, or a data frame is you want to
create a logical vector which tells you
where the NA's are and so
that you can remove them by sub-setting.
So here I've got a, a vector x,
this is a very simple example.
Which has the numbers 1, 2 and 4 and 5.
But then there are missing elements
NA in the third position and
in the fifth position.
So what I want to do is I want to get a
vector back that's just one two four five,
the non missing values.
And I want to strip out the missing value
so I can maybe do some computation.
So, what I, the first thing I do
is I use the is.na function to,
to go through the vector and
tell me which elements are NA and
I create a new vector called,
which I called bad here.
So, bad is going to be a logical
vector which tells, which,
which is true if the element is
missing and false if it's not missing.
So, even though I haven't printed it here
the, the, the bad vector is going to
be a logical vector that has false,
false, true, false, true, false.
Right, because the third and
the fifth elements are missing.
So, when I.
Now that tells me which ones
are missing but actually I
don't want the ones that are missing,
I want the ones that are non missing.
So I need to take the kind of
the opposite of bad which I
can use with the bang operator or
exclamation point.
So now I take x single
bracket bang bad and
that gives me the good elements
which are 1, 2, 4 and 5.
So what if there are a multiple vectors or
multiple objects and you want to take and
each one has a kind of missing values in
slightly different places and you kind of,
you want to take the subset
of all the objects that have
no missing values, all right?
So here I created an x, a vector called x.
Which is 1, 2, 4 and 5, and
missing values scattered about.
And then y is, is a character vector
with also some missing values in it.
So I can use the complete cases
function on both vectors which will
give me a vector that tells me which of,
of, of the two different vectors,
which ones had were, which, which are,
which positions are there that
have both elements non missing.
So you can see the first two are,
are both non missing.
I got 1, 2, in the first one,
and a, b in the second one.
The third one's missing,
the fourth one is non missing the,
the fifth one is missing and
the sixth one is non missing.
So, of, for the both, for
both vectors x and y,
I want the first, the second,
the fourth, and the sixth elements.
So now when I subset x, I get the good
elements of that, and when I subset y,
I also get the good elements of that.
So that's how I can look
at multiple objects and
kind of subset all the missing
values out to get the good elements.
You could also remove you can
also use complete cases to
remove missing values from data frames.
So here I've got a simple data frame
where I'm showing the first six rows.
As you can see there are six columns to
this data frame so there's six variables.
And there's some missing values
in the ozone variable and
there's some missing values
in the solar.r variable.
And so all I want is the is the, is the,
are the rows of the data frame where
all the values are non missing, right?
So in this simple example,
the rows that I want are rows 1 through 4.
So I can use complete cases on air,
on the airquality data frame.
And I create a, a logical vector
that I called good here, so
the logical vector here tells
me which rows are complete.
And then when I subset out
the air quality matrix take and
take out the first couple of
rows you can see that I now,
that none of the rows have
any missing values in them.
So that's subsetting out missing values.
And there, in complete cases of
very handy function which is when,
when you have multiple sets of vectors or
dat, or large data frames or you want to
subset all out, all the missing values.